<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
<style type="text/css">
/*<![CDATA[*/
body{font-style:normal;font-weight:normal;font-size:1em;font-family:sans-serif;}
p{margin:0.2em auto 0em auto;}
h1{text-align:center;margin:0.1em auto 0.1em auto;}
h2{text-align:center;margin:1.1em auto 0.1em auto;}
h3{text-align:left;margin:0.2em auto 0.2em 0em;}
.ff1{font-style:normal;font-weight:normal;}
.ff2{font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;}
.ff3{font-style:normal;font-weight:bold;}
.ff4{font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;}
.ff5{font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;}
.ff6{font-style:normal;font-weight:normal;}
.fs8{font-size:0.75em;}
.fs7{font-size:0.80em;}
.fs6{font-size:0.85em;}
.fs4{font-size:0.90em;}
.fs3{font-size:0.95em;}
.fs2{font-size:1em;}
.fs1{font-size:1.2em;font-weight:bold;}
.fs5{font-size:1.4em;margin:0 auto 0 auto;text-align:center;font-weight:bold;}
.fs0{font-size:1.6em;margin:0 auto 0 auto;text-align:center;font-weight:bold;}
span.bq{margin-left:2.6em;}
p.bq{margin:0 auto 0 2.6em;text-indent:0em;}
p.bqb{margin:0 auto 0 2.6em;text-indent:-0.4em;}
.hdr{text-align:center;margin:0em auto 1em auto;}
.ftr{text-align:center;margin:1em auto 0em auto;}
.in{text-indent:1.2em;}
.noin{text-indent:0em;margin:0.5em auto 0em auto;}
.xs{margin:0.5em auto 0.1em auto;}
.di{margin:2em 2em 0em 2em;}
.ctr{text-align:center;margin:1em auto 1em auto;}
/*]]>*/
</style>
<title>Early Modern Texts: "Toleration" by John Locke</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Toleration</h1>
<h2>conventionally known as “A Letter about Toleration”</h2>
<h2>John Locke</h2>
<p class="di">Copyright ©2010–2015 All rights reserved. Jonathan
Bennett<br />
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">Brackets</span>]</span>
enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that
has been added, but can be read as though it were part of the
original text. Occasional •bullets, and also indenting of passages
that are not quotations, are meant as aids to grasping the
structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis
.... indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to
present more difficulty than it is worth. Longer omissions are
reported between brackets in normal-sized type.—Locke wrote this in
Latin; there was a contemporary English translation, and the
question of how much Locke knew or affected it is controversial. It
is fairly accurate, though very wordy; the present version has some
debts to it, but the Latin has been consulted at every stage.—The
section-breaks and -titles are all added in this version.—About the
title: the work was originally published (not by Locke) in the form
of a letter, but that was a scam. In his edition of the work
(Nijhoff, 1963) Mario Montuori presents the scholarly case for
this; and anyone who reads the thing with an intelligent eye will
see that Montuori is right: it <span class="ff2">obviously</span> wasn’t
written as a letter. See the note on page 4.<br />First launched:
May 2010<br />[This single-column (but otherwise unrevised) version by Philosophy Ink derives from the original two-column PDF version at http://www.earlymoderntexts.com. Even Bennett's pagination has been retained since he sometimes makes in-text references to his own page numbers.]</p>
<br />
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke</div>
<h3>Contents</h3>
<a href="#t1">1: The insincerity of the
zealots</a><br />
<a href="#t2">2: The role of the civil
magistrate</a><br />
<a href="#t3">3: What is a church?</a><br />
<a href="#t4">4: The limits on toleration</a><br />
<a href="#t5">5: The magistrate's role in all
this:</a><br />
<a href="#t6">6: Church and state: forms of
worship</a><br />
<a href="#t7">7: Idolatry</a><br />
<a href="#t8">8: Church and state: articles of
faith</a><br />
<a href="#t9">9: Individual conscience</a><br />
<a href="#t10">10. What should not be
tolerated</a><br />
<a href="#t11">11: Gatherings</a><br />
<a href="#t12">12: Heresy and schism</a><br />
<br />
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 1: The insincerity of the
zealots</div>
<h2 id="t1">1: The insincerity of the zealots</h2>
<p class="noin">I
have been asked what I think about the mutual toleration of
Christians in their different professions of religion; I have to
answer freely that I regard such toleration as the chief
identifying mark of the true Church. When some people boast of •the
antiquity of places and names, or of the pomp of their outward
worship; others of •the reformation of their discipline; everyone
of •the orthodoxy of their faith (for everyone is orthodox to
himself!), this conduct and other behaviour of the same kind are
marks of men striving for power and domination over one another
<span class="ff2">much</span> more than marks of the Church of
Christ. Even if someone has an absolutely true claim to all these
things, if he lacks charity, meekness, and good-will in general
towards all mankind, even to those who are not Christians, he
certainly falls short of being a true Christian himself. ‘The kings
of the Gentiles exercise leadership over them’, said our Saviour to
his disciples, ‘but you shall not be so.’ <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="ff2 fs4">Luke 22:25</span>]</span> True
religion is something different: it exists not to create<br />
<p class="bqb">•external pomp, or</p>
<p class="bqb">•ecclesiastical dominance, or</p>
<p class="bqb">•force ·of any kind·,</p>but rather to create virtuous and pious lives. Anyone
who wants to enlist in Christ’s Church must above all declare war
on his own lusts and vices. No-one will do himself any good by
calling himself a Christian unless his life is holy, his conduct
pure, and his spirit kind and gentle.... I would find it hard to
believe that someone who is careless about his own salvation is
concerned for mine. It’s not possible for someone who hasn’t really
embraced the Christian religion in his own heart to try with all
his strength to make other people Christians. According to the
Gospel and the apostles, no-one can be a Christian unless he has
•charity and •the faith that works through love, not through force.
Now, I appeal to the consciences of those who persecute, wound,
torture, and kill other men on the excuse of ‘religion’, whether
they do this in a spirit of friendship and kindness. What would it
take to convince me that they do? I would need to see those fiery
zealots<p class="bqb">•correcting <span class="ff2">in the same way</span> their
friends and members of their own household for their open sins
against the Gospel’s teachings;</p><p class="bqb">•persecuting with fire and sword
their own parishioners who are tainted with enormous vices and at
risk of eternal damnation if they don’t change, expressing their
love and desire for the salvation of their souls by all sorts of
cruelties and tortures.</p> The zealots claim that they are acting out
of love and care for men’s souls when they take their estates, maim
them with whips, starve and torture them in stinking prisons, and
finally kill them. If that is right—if all this is done merely to
make men Christians and save their souls—then why don’t these
zealots also go after the prostitution, fraud, malice, and so
on....that are so conspicuous among their flocks? These and their
like are certainly more contrary to God’s glory, to the Church’s
purity, and to the salvation of souls, than •any conscientious
dissent from ecclesiastical decisions, or •not going to church but
leading an innocent life. Why does this zeal for God, for the
Church, and for the salvation of souls—zeal that goes all the way
to burning people to death—•let pass without criticism moral vices
and wickednesses that everyone thinks are flatly contrary to
Christian belief, yet •stretch itself to the introducing of</p>
<div class="ftr">1</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 1: The insincerity of the
zealots</div>
<p class="noin">ceremonies or establishing of opinions that are mostly about
fine-grained and intricate matters that ordinary folk can’t
understand? In these controversies which side is in the right and
which guilty of schism or heresy? That will finally be decided when
the cause of their separation comes to be judged. <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="fs4">Perhaps Locke meant ‘... judged by God on
Judgment</span></span> <span class="fs4">Day’; but ‘finally’ could
instead point to the last chapter in the present</span>
<span class="fs4">work, where ‘heresy’ and ‘schism’ are defined in
ways that make the</span> <span class="fs4">‘which is guilty?’
question fairly easy for <span class="ff2">us</span> to
answer.<span class="fs3">]</span></span> Anyone who follows Christ,
accepts His doctrine, and bears His yoke is not a heretic—even if
he cuts himself off from his father and mother or anyone else, and
from the public assemblies and ceremonies of his country or
anything else.</p>
<p class="in">Sectarian divisions ·within Christianity· may be
enormously harmful to the salvation of souls; but concerning such
‘works of the flesh’ as<br />
<p class="bq">adultery,</p>
<p class="bq">fornication,</p>
<p class="bq">personal dirtiness,</p>
<p class="bq">sexual misconduct, and</p>
<p class="bq">idol-worship</p>
the apostle <span class="fs3">[<span class=
"fs4">Paul</span>]</span> has clearly said that ‘they who do them
shall not inherit the kingdom of God’ <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="ff2 fs4">Galatians 5:19–21</span>]</span>. So
anyone who really cares about enlarging God’s kingdom ought to work
just as hard and carefully on rooting out of these immoralities as
on wiping out sects. And someone who doesn’t do this—someone who is
cruel and implacable towards those who differ from him in doctrine,
but is indulgent towards vices and immoralities that are just as
much at odds with the label ‘Christian’—well, let him •talk as much
as he likes about the Church, his •actions prove that he is
concerned not with God’s kingdom but with something else
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">or the Latin may mean: ‘...
but with some other</span></span> <span class=
"fs4">kingdom’<span class="fs3">]</span></span>. Someone who
intensely desires that another man be saved acts on that desire by
having the other man die in agony, still unconverted—that seems
very strange to me and I think it would seem strange to anyone
else; and surely no-one will ever believe that such behaviour can
come from love, from benevolence, from charity. If someone<p class="bqb">•holds that men should be compelled by fire and sword to profess certain doctrines and conform one kind of exterior worship, and pays no attention to their morals;</p>—if someone<p class="bqb">•tries to convert people to ‘the faith’ by forcing them to profess things that they don’t believe and allowing them to behave in ways that the Gospel does not permit—</p>it’s clear that he wants his own group to have as many
members as possible; but he thinks the group is a Christian
church?—no-one will believe that! No wonder these people use
weapons that don’t belong in the Christian armoury: they aren’t
fighting for true religion and the Christian Church. If they
sincerely wanted the good of souls, as the Captain of our salvation
did, they would follow the perfect example of that Prince of peace,
who sent out His troops—to subdue the nations and pull them into
His Church—armed not with •swords or other weapons but with •the
Gospel of peace and with the holiness of what they had to say. This
was actually a more efficient way of going about it, with armies of
heavenly legions, than could be achieved in the other way by any
son of the Church, however powerful, with all his battalions.</p>
<p class="in">Tolerating those who differ from us in matters of
religion is so fitting to the Gospel and to reason that it seems
monstrous for men to fail to see this clearly. I don’t want here to
go on about the pride and ambition of some, the intemperate passion
and uncharitable zeal of others; those are faults that may be
inevitable in any human affairs, though no-one will</p>
<div class="ftr">2</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 2: The role of the civil
magistrate</div>
<p class="noin">outright admit to them.... But I do want to help putting an end to
the activities of <span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> people who plead
a concern for ‘the public good and obedience to the laws of the
land’ as an excuse for their persecution and unchristian cruelty,
and of <span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> those who expect to get
away with libertinism and licentiousness on grounds of ‘religion’;
that is, in short, stopping anyone from imposing on himself or
others by the claim that he is <span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span>
loyal and obedient to the monarch or <span class=
"ff3 fs3">(2)</span> sincere in his worship of God. To achieve
this, it is utterly necessary that we draw a precise boundary-line
between <span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> the affairs of civil
government and <span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> the affairs of
religion. If we don’t, there will be no end to the controversies
arising between those who have (or at least pretend to have)
<span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> a concern for men’s souls and
those who have (or at least <span class="fs2">pretend to have)
<span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> a care for the
commonwealth.</span></p><h2 id="t2">2: The role of the civil
magistrate</h2><p class="noin"><span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">The word
‘magistrate’ [Latin <span class="ff2">magistratus</span>] will be
used here, in a sense</span></span> <span class="fs4">that was
common in early modern times, to stand for whoever it is
that</span> <span class="fs4">makes and enforces a state’s laws.
That includes magistrates in our</span> <span class="fs4">sense of
the word, but also high court judges, legislators, monarchs,
and</span> <span class="fs4">so on. In a given case the magistrate
might be a committee, or a system;</span> <span class="fs4">Latin
doesn’t distinguish ‘he’ from ‘it’; but ‘he’ will be used
throughout</span> <span class="fs4">this version. <span class=
"fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="noin">The commonwealth seems to me to be a society
of men constituted only for the purpose of preserving and promoting
the public good.</p>
<p class="in">By ‘the public good’ I mean: life, liberty, freedom
from bodily illness and pain, and the possession of <span class=
"ff2">things</span> such as money, land, ·houses·, furniture, and
so on.</p>
<p class="in">The civil magistrate’s job is....to secure, for the
people in general and for each one in particular, the just
possession of these worldly things. If anyone tries to violate the
laws governing this, he should be deterred by the fear of
punishment, consisting of the lessening or outright loss of the
goods that he otherwise might and ought to enjoy. Because no-one
willingly allows himself to be punished by the loss of any of his
goods, let alone his liberty or his life, the magistrate in
punishing those who violate any other man’s rights is armed with
the force and strength of all his subjects.</p>
<p class="in">I shall now present some arguments which seem to me
to show conclusively that •the magistrate’s jurisdiction doesn’t
extend beyond these civic concerns, •that all civil power, law and
dominion is restricted to the protection of the public goods I have
listed, and that •it can’t and oughtn’t to be extended to the
salvation of souls.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> The care of souls is
not committed to the civil magistrate any more than it is to other
men. It isn’t committed <span class="fs2">to him by <span class=
"ff3">God</span>, because it seems that God hasn’t ever
given</span> <span class="ff2">any</span> man the authority to
compel someone else to join his religion. And such a power can’t be
given to the magistrate by <span class="ff3">the people</span>, because no-one can be so
unconcerned about his own salvation that he blindly leaves it to
someone</p>
<div class="ftr">3</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 2: The role of the civil
magistrate</div>
else—whether monarch or subject—to tell him what faith or worship
to embrace. And anyway •the life and power of true religion
consists in faith, •·faith involves believing·, and •no-one
<span class="ff2">can</span> just believe what someone else tells
him to believe, even if he wants to. Whatever we ·audibly· <span class="ff2">say</span>, whatever
outward worship we conform to, if we aren’t fully convinced that
what we say is true and how we worship is pleasing to God,....we’ll
merely have set up obstacles to our salvation....by adding
•hypocrisy and •contempt of God’s majesty to our catalogue of sins.
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> It can’t be up to
the magistrate to take care of souls, because his power consists
only in outward force, whereas true and saving religion consists in
the inward faith of the soul, without which nothing can be
acceptable to God, and which the nature of the human mind won’t
allow to be compelled by any outward force. Confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, torture—nothing like that can make men change their
inward judgments about things.</p>
<p class="noin"><span class="fs3">[</span><span class="fs4">Locke’s
next few words might suggest that this work was written as a</span>
<span class="fs4">letter to the person who claimed to have been its
recipient; but here and</span> <span class="fs4">elsewhere Locke
uses ‘You say:’ to introduce thoughts that he knew <span class=
"ff2">that</span></span> <span class="fs4">man would not have had.
These are addressed simply to the reader,</span> <span class=
"fs4">whoever he or she may be. On page 27 he uses ‘you say’ and
the like in</span> <span class="fs4">addressing a
heretic.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="in">But you say: ‘The magistrate can use arguments that
will draw the heterodox to the truth, and effect their salvation.’
So he can, but so can anyone else. In teaching, instructing, and
correcting error by reason, he can certainly do what any good man
can fittingly do; being a magistrate doesn’t stop him from still
being human and Christian. But it is one thing to persuade, another
to command; one thing to press with arguments, another with
judicial rulings.... The civil power should not ·try to· establish
any articles of faith or doctrine, or any forms of worship, by the
force of its laws. Laws without penalties have no force, and in our
present context penalties are just silly, because they have no
power to change anyone’s mind.... The only way to change men’s
opinions is through <span class="ff2">light</span>, and you can’t
produce light ·in <span class="fs2">someone’s mind<span class=
"fs1">·</span> by torturing him.</span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(3)</span> It can’t be the
civil magistrate’s job to care for the salvation of men’s souls,
because even if laws and penalties <span class="ff2">could</span>
change men’s minds, that would do nothing for the salvation of
their souls. Even if there were only one truth, one road to the
heavenly home, what hope is there that more men would be led into
it if they had to •walk out on the light of their own reason,
•oppose the dictates of their own consciences, and •blindly submit
to the will of their governors and worship God in the way that was
established by law in the countries where they were born? In the
variety of opinions in religion, the narrow way into heaven would
be narrow indeed! It would be open only to those from one
geographical region; whether a man received eternal happiness or
eternal misery would depend on where he was born—which is utterly
absurd and not worthy of God.</p>
<p class="in">I could have presented other considerations leading
to the same conclusion; but the ones I have given seem to me
sufficient to show that the civil government’s power relates only
to the public good, attending only to the care of the things of
this world and having nothing to do with the world to come.</p>
<div class="ftr">4</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 3: What is a church?</div>
<h2 id="t3">3: What is a church?</h2><p class="noin">Let us now
consider what a church is. A church seems to me to be a free
society of men who voluntarily come together to worship God in a
way that they think is acceptable to Him and effective in saving
their souls.</p>
<p class="in">I repeat: a ‘free’ society that men join
‘voluntarily’. No-one is <span class="ff2">born</span> a member of
a church; otherwise the religion of parents and grandparents would
be inherited by the children in the same way that they inherit
wealth and land—and you can’t imagine anything more absurd than
that. So there it is: No-one is by nature bound to any particular
church or sect; everyone voluntarily joins the society in which he
thinks he has found the creed and mode of worship that is truly
acceptable to God. He joined that communion in the hope of
salvation, and that hope is the only reason he can have for staying
there. If later on he discovers something erroneous in the doctrine
or unsuitable in the worship, he should be just as free to leave
that society as he was to join it in the first place. He can’t be
held by any bonds except what come from the certain expectation of
eternal life. A church, then, is a society of members voluntarily
uniting for that purpose.</p>
<p class="in">What we have to consider now is what power this
church has and what laws it is subject to.</p>
<p class="in">No society, however free it is, and however slight
the basis is for its existing—whether it is a society
<p class="bqb">•of scholars for doing
philosophy,</p>
<p class="bqb">•of merchants for transacting business,
or</p>
<p class="bqb">•of men of leisure for conversation and the
exchange of ideas,</p>—can survive and not fall to
pieces unless it is regulated by some laws; and the same holds for
any church. Place and time of meeting must be agreed on; conditions
for membership and for exclusion must be established; and so on....
But since the members of this society ·or church· joined it freely
and without coercion, as I have shown, it follows that the right of
making its laws must belong to the society itself—or anyway to
those whom the society has by common consent authorised to do
this.</p>
<p class="in">But you say: ‘No society can be a true <span class=
"ff2">church</span> unless it has a bishop or presbyter with ruling
authority derived—through an uninterrupted succession—from the
apostles themselves.’ ·I have three things to say
in reply to that.·</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> Show me the edict by
which Christ imposed that law on His Church—I mean one that says
this clearly and explicitly. I have a point in demanding this,
namely that Christ seemed to imply the opposite, when he promised
us that ‘wheresoever two or three are gathered together’ in His
name He will be <span class="fs2">in the midst of them <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="ff2 fs4">Matthew 18:20</span>]</span>. Think
about it: does an</span> assembly that has Christ in the midst of
them lack anything needed to make it a true church? It certainly
doesn’t lack anything needed for the salvation of souls, and that
is all that matters.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> Consider those who
lay so much stress on a continuous succession of church rulers
coming down from Christ’s founding of the Church: look at how
greatly they have disagreed among themselves! These disagreements
·over which of them is ‘the true Church’· puts us in a position to
<span class="ff2">think about it and to choose the church of our
preference.</span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(3)</span> I’ll admit that your
church has a ruler established by as long a succession as you like,
if you’ll admit that I am free to join the society that I believe
contains what I need for the salvation of my soul....</p>
<div class="ftr">5</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 3: What is a church?</div>
<p class="in">It is fair to ask those who are so solicitous about
‘the true Church’ the following question. Consider these two:
<p class="bqb">•The conditions for belonging to the Church consist purely in things that the Holy Spirit has in the Scriptures explicitly declared to be necessary to salvation;</p>
<p class="bqb">•Men may impose their own inventions and interpretations on others as if they were of divine authority, and may establish by ecclesiastical laws—as absolutely necessary to the profession of Christianity—things that the Holy Scriptures don’t mention or anyway don’t explicitly command.</p>
My question is this: Which of those is more agreeable to the Church
of Christ? Someone who requires for ecclesiastical communion things
that Christ doesn’t require for eternal life may go ahead and
create a society that fits his opinion and his purposes; but a
society based on laws that are not Christ’s, which excludes from
its membership people whom He will one day receive into the Kingdom
of Heaven—how can that be called a church of Christ?.... The Gospel
often declares that the true disciples of Christ must suffer
persecution; but I can’t find anywhere in the New Testament that
the Church of Christ is to persecute others, and force others by
fire and sword to embrace her faith and doctrine.</p>
<p class="in">The purpose of a religious society (I repeat) is the
public worship of God and through that the acquisition of eternal
life. That should set the limits •to discipline within such a
society and •to all ecclesiastical laws. Nothing should or could be
transacted in this society relating to public goods or the
possession of land; no force is to be used here on any occasion
whatsoever, for force belongs wholly to the civil magistrate, and
the ownership of external goods is under his jurisdiction.</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘Then what sanction can ecclesiastical laws
have if they can’t be backed up by force?’ I answer:.... The
‘arms’—·the ‘force·’—by which the members of this society are kept
in line consist in exhortations, warnings, and advice. If these
don’t succeed in correcting the delinquents and redirecting those
who stray, the only thing the society can do with these stubborn
and obstinate people for whom there is no hope of reformation is to
throw them out. This is the last and utmost ‘force’ of
ecclesiastical authority. In such a punishment the <span class=
"ff2">whole</span> effect of the punishment is that the offender
stops being a member of that church; nothing more.</p>
<p class="in">Having settled these things, let us turn now to the
question of the limits on official toleration.</p>
<div class="ftr">6</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 4: The limits on
toleration</div>
<h2 id="t4">4: The limits on toleration</h2><p class="noin">
·BETWEEN A CHURCH AND ITS MEMBERS·<br />No church is obliged
as a matter of toleration to retain as a member anyone who, after
warnings, continues obstinately to offend against the society’s
laws. The laws are what hold the society together; if members could
break them with impunity, the society would collapse. Still, care
should be taken that the process of excommunication—what is said
and what is done—doesn’t involve anything by which the person in
question is physically or financially harmed. For all force (I
repeat) belongs only to the magistrate; no private persons should
ever use force except in self-defence. Excommunication doesn’t and
can’t deprive the excommunicated person of any civil goods that he
formerly possessed: all those things are matters for the civil
government and are under the magistrate’s protection. The whole
force of excommunication consists in the society’s declaration
that
<p class="bq">one of its members is being separated from the
main body—·amputated, as it were·—and with the ending of that connection there is also an end to that person’s participating in certain activities that the society
allows to its members.</p>
These are activities that no-one has a civil right to engage in; a
person doesn’t suffer a civil injury if a church minister refuses
him the bread and wine (in celebrating the Lord’s Supper) which was
bought with someone else’s money.</p>
<p class="noin">·BETWEEN PRIVATE PERSONS·<br />No private person has any right to
encroach in any way on another person’s civil goods because he
declares his allegiance to another church or religion. Anything
that a man has as a matter of human rights or civil rights is to
remain inviolably <span class="ff2">his</span>. These are none of
religion’s business. Whether the man is Christian or pagan, he is
to be kept safe from violence and injury. Indeed, we should go
beyond mere justice, adding benevolence and charity; the Gospel
commands this, reason urges it, and it is favoured by the natural
fellowship we are born into. <span class="fs3">[<span class=
"fs4">That is our fellowship</span></span> <span class="fs4">merely
as human beings; our</span> •<span class="fs4">natural membership
of that group stands</span> <span class="fs4">in contrast with
our</span> •<span class="fs4">voluntary membership of a church or
other society.<span class="fs3">]</span></span> If someone strays
from the right path, that is his misfortune, not yours; and your
belief that he will be miserable in the after-life is not a reason
for you to give him a bad time in his present life.</p><p class="noin">
·BETWEEN CHURCH AND CHURCH·<br />What I say about toleration between
private persons who differ in religion applies also to particular
churches; they relate to one another pretty much as private persons
do, with none of them—even ones to which the civil magistrate
belongs—having any kind of jurisdiction over any other. The civil
government can’t give a church any new rights, any more than a
church can do that for the civil government. A church starts as a
free and voluntary society, and it retains that status whether or
not a magistrate joins it or leaves it. The magistrate’s joining
doesn’t give a church the power of the sword, and his leaving
doesn’t deprive it of its right to instruct and to excommunicate.
This is the basic unchangeable situation of a spontaneous society:
it has the power to remove any of its members who break its rules;
and it can’t, through the acquisition of new members, come to have
jurisdiction over anyone who doesn’t belong to it. So there should
be, between churches as between private persons, equity and
friendship with no claims of superiority or jurisdiction.</p>
<div class="ftr">7</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 4: The limits on
toleration</div>
<p class="in">For an example that may help to clarify this, let us
suppose that the city of Constantinople <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="fs4">today’s Istanbul</span>]</span> contains
two churches, one of Calvinists and the other of Arminians
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">= roughly ‘Dutch protestant
anti-Calvinists’</span>]</span>. Will anyone say that one of these
churches has a right to confiscate the goods of the members of the
other (we see this happening in some places) or to exile or execute
them, just because they differ in some doctrines and ceremonies,
while the Turks stand around laughing at how cruelly Christians
rage against Christians? If one of these churches does have this
power of ill-treating the other, •which of them is it? and •why? No
doubt someone will answer that it’s the orthodox church that has
authority over the erroneous or heretical one. This is an inflated
way of saying <span class="ff2">nothing</span>. Every church is
orthodox to itself and erroneous or heretical to the others;....so
that the controversy between these churches about the truth of
their doctrines and the correctness of their worship is a
stand-off; and no judicial authority, in Constantinople or anywhere
else, can give a judgment that settles it. That decision is to be
made only by the Supreme Judge of all men. To Him alone belongs the
punishment of those who are in error....</p>
<p class="in">And even if we did know for sure which of these two
quarreling churches was in the right, that wouldn’t give to that
church the right to destroy the other. Churches have no
jurisdiction in worldly matters, and anyway fire and sword are not
proper instruments for correcting men’s errors and informing them
of the truth. Suppose, however, that the civil magistrate is
inclined to favour one of the churches and to give them his sword
with permission to use it to chastise the dissenters as they
pleased. Will anyone say that a Christian church can get
jurisdiction over its brethren from a Turkish emperor? <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="fs4">See note on ‘magistrate’ on page
3.</span>]</span> An unbeliever who doesn’t himself have any
authority to punish Christians for the articles of their faith
can’t confer such an authority on any society of Christians, giving
them a right that he doesn’t have himself. And the reason why that
is so in Constantinople is equally a reason in any Christian
kingdom. The civil power is the same everywhere; the civil power
that a Christian prince can give to a church is the <span class=
"fs2">same as what a heathen prince can give—namely <span class=
"ff2">nothing</span>.</span></p>
<p class="in">It is worthwhile to notice that the most hostile of
these defenders of truth, these opposers of error, these protestors
against schism, hardly ever let fly with their burning zeal for God
unless they have the civil magistrate on their side. But when the
magistrate gives them the upper hand, the peace and charity that
they have been maintaining are immediately laid aside. When their
civil power isn’t adequate ·for the task of suppressing rival
churches·, they can bear most patiently and harmlessly the
otherwise frightening epidemic of idolatry, superstition, and
heresy in their neighbourhood. They don’t freely and vigorously
•argue against errors that are in favour with the magistracy. Yet
the only way to propagate truth is through reasoning and •argument,
combined with gentleness and benevolence.</p>
<p class="in">In short: no individual or church or commonwealth has
a right to attack the civil rights and worldly goods of anyone on
pretence of religion. If you disagree, think about what a
pernicious a seed of discord and war, what a powerful provocation
to endless hatreds, rapines, and slaughters you—·or anyway your
opinion·—is offering to mankind. No peace and security among
mankind—let alone common <span class="ff2">friendship</span>—can
ever exist as long as people think that governments get their
authority from God and that religion is to be propagated by force
of arms.</p>
<p class="noin">·BETWEEN CLERICS AND OTHERS·<br />Let us see
what the duty of toleration requires from those who are
distinguished from the rest of mankind (‘the laity’, as they like
to call us) by some ecclesiastical character and</p>
<div class="ftr">8</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 4: The limits on
toleration</div>
office—bishops, priests, presbyters, ministers, and so on. This
isn’t the place to explore the origins of the clergy’s power and
dignity. I’ll just say this: wherever their authority comes from,
its source is ecclesiastical; so it should be kept within the
bounds of the Church and not extended to civil affairs, because the
Church is absolutely separate and distinct from the commonwealth.
The boundaries of each are settled and immovable. •Mixing together
these two societies which are utterly distinct in
<p class="bqb">•how they originated,</p>
<p class="bqb">•what they are for, and</p>
<p class="bqb">•what they do</p>
is tantamount to jumbling together heaven and earth—and two things
can’t be more distinct than those! So no church official, whatever
his rank may be, can deprive another man of liberty or of any part
of his worldly goods on the grounds that there is a religious
difference between them. What isn’t lawful for the whole Church
can’t be lawful for any of its members.
<p class="in">It’s not enough for an ecclesiastic to abstain from
violence, plunder and all sorts of persecution. Someone who claims
to be a successor of the apostles, and takes on the role of
teacher, ought to impress on his hearers the duties of peace and
goodwill towards all men, heretical and orthodox.... He should urge
all his flock—private persons and any magistrates there may be
there—to charity, meekness, and toleration, and try to cool down
all the heat and unreasonable hostility towards dissenters that a
man may be led into •by his own fiery zeal for his own sect or •by
the crafty manipulations of others. I won’t go into details about
how—and how much—Church and state would profit if pulpits
everywhere proclaimed this doctrine of peace and toleration; if I
did, I might seem to be coming down too hard on men whose dignity I
don’t want to be diminished by myself or anyone else. I’ll just say
that <span class="ff2">that is how it ought to be</span>; and if
anyone purporting to be a minister of God’s word and a preacher of
the gospel of peace teaches otherwise, either he doesn’t understand
his duties or he neglects them, and ·either way· he will be
answerable to the Prince of peace for this. If Christians are to be
told—·and they certainly <span class="ff2">are</span>·—not to
retaliate even if someone inflicts on them ‘seventy times
<span class="fs2">seven’ injuries <span class="fs3">[<span class=
"ff2 fs4">Matthew 18:22</span>]</span>, how could it be right for
them</span> to ‘retaliate’ against people who haven’t done them any
harm? I mean people who are merely minding their own business, and
merely want—whatever common opinion may think—to worship God in a
way that they think is acceptable to Him and to cling to the
religion that gives them their best chance of eternal salvation. In
issues of bodily health in private life, everyone suits his own
convenience, and follows the course that <span class=
"ff2">he</span> likes best. No-one complains that his neighbour is
managing his affairs badly. No-one is angry with someone else for
an error committed in sowing his crops or choosing a husband for
his daughter. No-one scolds a spendthrift for wasting his money on
drink.... But if any man •doesn’t regularly go to church, or
•doesn’t, in church, exactly follow the established ceremonies, or
•doesn’t bring his children to be initiated in the rites of some
church or other, this immediately causes an uproar. Everyone is
ready to avenge this great crime, and the zealots can hardly
restrain themselves from punishing the man in advance of his being
formally tried and convicted and <span class="ff2">then</span>
condemned to the loss of liberty, goods, or life. If only the
ecclesiastical orators in all the sects would put their energies
into •arguments that would correct the errors of dissidents rather
than into •punishing the dissenters themselves. They shouldn’t make
up for their lack of reasons by using the instruments of force,
which are unseemly in a Churchman’s hands. They shouldn’t reinforce
their eloquence or learning</p>
<div class="ftr">9</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 5: The magistrate’s
role</div>
with an appeal to the magistrate’s authority; if they do, they’ll
create a suspicion that despite their front as lovers of the truth
they are really using fire and sword in the pursuit of worldly
dominance. It won’t be easy to convince intelligent men that that
someone who—dry-eyed and content with himself—delivers his brother
to the executioner to be burned to death is acting purely from a
strong desire to save that brother from the flames of hell in the
world to come. <h2 id="t5">5: The magistrate’s role in
all this</h2><p class="noin">Let us now consider magistrate’s role in this
matter of toleration; it is certainly a big one.</p>
<p class="in">I have shown that the care of souls is not the
magistrate’s business,....which consists in prescribing laws and
enforcing them through a penal system; whereas charitable care,
which consists in teaching, warning and persuading, is something
that any man is free to do. <span class="fs3">[<span class=
"fs4">Locke writes that sentence</span></span> <span class=
"fs4">with two made-up-Latin words <span class=
"ff2">authoritativa</span> and <span class=
"ff2">charitativa</span>—as it were</span> <span class=
"fs4">‘authoritocracy’ and ‘charitocracy’. Neither word occurs
again in this</span> <span class="fs4">work.<span class=
"fs3">]</span></span> So the responsibility for each man’s soul
is <span class="ff2">his</span>; it is to be left to him.
You say: ‘What if he neglects the care of his soul?’ Well, what if
he neglects the care of his health? or of his estate? They are
nearer to the magistrate’s jurisdiction than the man’s soul is; so
is it all right for the magistrate to set up a law explicitly
forbidding people to become poor or sick? Laws try to secure that a
person’s goods and health are not harmed by fraud or violence on
the part of others; but they don’t try to secure them against
negligence bad management by the person himself.... •Suppose a
prince wanted to force his subjects to accumulate riches: is he to
make a law requiring them to become merchants or musicians? Or to
force everyone to become a shopkeeper or metal-worker, because some
people thrive and grow rich in these occupations? •Or suppose he
wants to make his subjects preserve the health and strength of
their bodies. Will he forbid them by law to consult any but •Roman
physicians and require them to live according to •their
prescriptions? No medicine or chicken soup that wasn’t prepared in
the <span class="fs2">Vatican or in a Geneva shop—<span class=
"ff2">really</span>?</span></p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘There are a thousand ways to wealth, but
only one way to heaven.’ Well said! And especially by people who
want to force men to take this or that way; for if there were
several ways to heaven, there would be no shadow of a case to be
made for compulsion.</p>
<p class="in">Well, now: suppose that I am marching vigorously
along the road which, according to the sacred geography, leads
straight to Jerusalem; why do people beat and harass me?
·They <span class="ff2">say</span> that it is· because
<p class="bqb">•I am wearing the wrong kind of boots; or </p>
<p class="bqb">•my hair isn’t cut in the right way; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I haven’t been washed clean <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="fs4">= ‘baptised’</span>]</span>; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I eat meat as I walk (or some other food that I eat for the sake of
my stomach); or</p></p>
<div class="ftr">10</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 5: The magistrate’s
role</div>
<p class="noin">
<p class="bqb">•I avoid certain detours that seem to me to
lead to brambles or precipices; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I choose, amongst several paths leading the
same way, the one that looks straightest and cleanest;
or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I avoid the company of travellers who are
more jolly than they ought to be; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I avoid the company of travellers who are more gloomy
than they ought to be; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I follow a guide who is clothed in white or crowned
with a mitre; or</p>
<p class="bqb">•I follow a guide who is not clothed in white or is not
crowned with a mitre.</p>
Only superstition or hypocrisy could connect •such frivolities with
religion or the salvation of souls; but if we <span class=
"ff2">think straight</span> about the matter we’ll see that •they
are the sorts of things that make enemies of Christian brethren who
agree on the substantial and truly fundamental part of
religion.</p>
<p class="in">Suppose we grant to these zealots who condemn all
dissent from their ways of doing things that these differences of
detail—·what I have listed as ‘frivolities’·—lead people to follow
different roads. What use can we make of that? Only one road truly
leads to eternal happiness—but which one? We aren’t sure! I can
studiously search for my own answer to this; and that will give me
as good a chance of finding the way to heaven as I could get by
letting the question be answered by the laws of the land. ·Suppose
that· I have a weak body, sunk under a wasting disease for which
(I think) there is one only remedy, but I don’t know what it is.
Should the magistrate prescribe a remedy for me, just because
there’s only one and we don’t know what it is? If there is only one
way for me to escape death, does that make it safe for me to do
whatever the magistrate ordains? These are things that everyone
ought to inquire into for himself, earnestly and thoughtfully
trying to get the answers by his own endeavours, not treating this
knowledge as the special possession of some kind of men. Monarchs
are born with more power than other men, but in nature they are
equal. The right to rule, and practised skill in ruling, don’t
bring with them secure knowledge of other things, least of all of
true religion.... But suppose that •the way to eternal life
probably <span class="ff2">is</span> better known by a monarch than
by his subjects, or at least that •in the prevailing uncertainty
we’ll do best by obeying his dictates. You say: ‘If he ordered you
to earn your living as a merchant, would you beg off because you
doubted if you could succeed in that trade?’ I answer: I would
become a merchant on the monarch’s command, because if I failed at
that he is well able to make up for my loss in some other way. If
he really does (as he says) want me to thrive and grow rich, he can
set me up again when unsuccessful ·trading· voyages have broken me.
But that’s not how things stand with the life to come. If I take
the wrong road with regard to <span class="ff2">that</span>, I am
undone, and the magistrate <span class="ff2">can’t</span> repair my
loss or ease my suffering.... What security can be given for the
kingdom of Heaven?</p>
<p class="in">You may say: ‘The secure judgment about the affairs
of religion comes not from the civil magistrate but from the
Church. What the civil magistrate does is to order us to follow the
Church’s decisions in our actions and our beliefs—to ensure by his
authority that no-one acts or believes in the business of religion
otherwise than the Church teaches. The Church is the source of
judgment about religious matters, and the magistrate makes
obedience to the Church’s judgments a matter of law which
everyone—the magistrate included—is required to obey.’ I reply:
Anyone can see that the label ‘the Church’, which was venerable in
the time of the apostles, has often been used in more recent times
to throw dust in people’s eyes. In our present context, it does
nothing for us. The one narrow road to heaven isn’t</p>
<div class="ftr">11</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 5: The magistrate’s
role</div>
better known to the magistrate than to private persons; so I can’t
safely be guided by him, who probably knows as little about the way
to heaven as I do, and who certainly isn’t as concerned for my
salvation as I am. Ever so many kings of the Jews led the blindly
following Israelites into idolatry and thereby into destruction.
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">Re ‘king’ and
‘magistrate’,</span></span> <span class="fs4">see note on page
3.<span class="fs3">]</span></span> Yet you tell me to cheer up and
accept that everything is now safe and secure, because what the
magistrate is enforcing are not his religious decrees but those of
the Church! Of what church? Certainly the one he likes best. ‘He
who compels me by laws and penalties to join some church isn’t
bringing his own judgment into this’—a likely story! What’s the
difference between his leading me himself and his delivering me
over to be led by others? I depend on his will either way; he
determines my eternal state either way.... If the religion of any
church becomes true and saving because it is lavishly praised by
its own prelates and priests and hangers-on, what religion will
ever be regarded as erroneous, false, and destructive? I am
doubtful concerning the doctrine of the Socinians; I am suspicious
of both the Papist and Lutheran forms of worship; will it be ever
safer for me to join one of those churches on the magistrate’s
command, because in religion his commands are all based on the
authority and advice of the doctors of that church?
<p class="in">The fact is that a church (if a convention of
clergymen making decrees must be called by that name) is usually
more apt to be influenced by the ·royal· court than the court is to
be influenced by a church. How the church fared under orthodox and
Arian emperors is very well known. And if you want something more
recent, look to the recent English examples of Henry VIII, Edward
VI, Mary, and Elizabeth: see how easily and smoothly the clergy
adapted their decrees—-articles of faith, form of worship,
<span class="ff2">everything</span>—to the inclinations of those
kings and queens. But those kings and queens had such different
views in religion, and ordered such different religious conduct,
that no sane man (I almost said ‘except an atheist’) will say that
a sincere and upright worshipper of God could—without offence to
his conscience or his veneration for God—obey all of them. What
more is there to say? A king lays down the law for another man’s
religion on the basis of •his own judgment or •the ecclesiastical
authority and advice of others—it’s the same thing!....</p>
<p class="in">But the crucial point that absolutely settles this
controversy is this: even if the magistrate’s opinion in religion
is sound, and the road he tells me to follow really is the one
endorsed by the Gospel, if I am not thoroughly convinced of that in
my own mind I won’t reach salvation by following it. No road that I
travel along against the dictates of my conscience will ever bring
me to the home of the blessed. I can grow rich by the use of skills
that give me no pleasure; I can be cured of a disease by remedies
that I have no faith in; but I can’t be saved by a religion that I
distrust or a worship that I dislike. It’s pointless for an
unbeliever to put on a performance; what God cares about is faith
and inner sincerity.... Amid all the aspects of religion that may
be doubtful, one thing is certain: a religion that I don’t believe
to be true can’t be true for me or useful for me....</p>
<div class="ftr">12</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 6: Church and state: forms
of worship</div>
<h2 id="t6">6: Church and state: forms of worship</h2>
<p class="noin">Now that we have freed men from in any way dominating one another
in matters of religion, what are they now to do? Everyone knows and
acknowledges that God ought to be publicly worshipped; otherwise
why the pressure to attend ·religious· assemblies? So men....should
enter into a religious society in which they meet
<p class="bqb">•to instruct and improve one another,</p>
<p class="bqb">•to declare to the world that they worship God and offer him such service as they aren’t ashamed of and as they think worthy of Him and acceptable to Him,</p>
<p class="bqb">•by the purity of doctrine, holiness of life, and decent form of worship to draw others to the love of the true religion, and</p>
<p class="bqb">•to perform other religious things that can’t be done by each private man on his own.</p>
I call religious societies <span class="ff2">churches</span>. The
magistrate, I say, ought to tolerate them, because what they are
doing is something that it is lawful for any individual to do,
namely to take care of the salvation of his soul. And this holds
equally for a national church and for independent congregations.</p>
<p class="in">There are two main aspects to any church—<span class=
"ff3 fs3">(1)</span> outward form and rites of worship and
<span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> doctrines; and these must be dealt
with separately if the whole matter of toleration is to be clearly
understood. <span class="fs1">·<span class=
"ff3 fs3">(1)</span></span> will be the topic of this chapter
<span class="fs2">and the next; <span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span>
will be taken up in chapter 8 on page 17·.</span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(1a)</span> The magistrate has
no power to enforce by civil law—in any church, even his own—the
use of any rites or ceremonies in the worship of God; not only
because these churches are free societies, but also because no form
of divine worship is justifiable unless those who practise it think
it is acceptable to God. Anything that is not done in good faith is
wrong in itself and not acceptable to God. It is self-contradictory
to •allow a religion the purpose of which is to please God and
•command its members to behave in ways that will displease God.</p>
<p class="noin"> <span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">The rest of this chapter says
a lot about ‘things that are indifferent’</span></span>
<span class="fs4">(Latin <span class="ff2">indifferens</span>). The
term has a very general meaning of ‘neither</span> <span class=
"fs4">to one side or the other’ of some polarity. In our present
context <span class="ff2">res</span></span> <span class=
"ff2 fs4">indifferentes apparently has to mean ‘actions that aren’t
in themselves</span> <span class="fs4">either morally required or
morally forbidden. But then why should Locke</span> <span class=
"fs4">and his imagined critic both imply that perhaps the civil law
can only</span> <span class="fs4">concern actions that are
‘indifferent’? The preparer of this version has</span> <span class=
"fs4">no suggestions to offer.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘Are you denying that the magistrate has any
power regarding indifferent things? If he isn’t allowed that, there
is nothing for law-making to do.’ No, I readily grant that
indifferent things, and perhaps only they, are subject to
legislative power. But it doesn’t follow that with respect to
something indifferent the magistrate may ordain anything he likes.
The rule and standard for all law-making is the public good. If
something isn’t useful to the commonwealth then it may not be
required by law, however indifferent it is.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(b)</span> Also, things that
are utterly indifferent in their own nature are taken out of the
magistrate’s reach when they are brought into a church and used in
the worship of God, because in that use they have nothing to do
with civil affairs. The church’s only concern is the salvation of
souls, and it is none of the commonwealth’s business what
ceremonies it uses for this purpose. The use or non-use of a
ceremony by a religious assembly makes no difference at all to the
life, liberty, or estate of any man. [Locke gives an example: a
magistrate may require the washing of children because</p>
<div class="ftr">13</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 6: Church and state: forms
of worship</div>
he thinks it helps to prevent disease, but it doesn’t follow from
this that he is entitled to require churches to baptise children.
Then he adapts the baptism example to a different slant on the
argument:] Let us apply the last case to the child of a Jew, and
the thing speaks for itself. A Christian magistrate may well have
subjects who are Jews; if we accept that it’s wrong to harm a Jew
by compelling him against his conscience to do in his religion
something that is in its nature indifferent, how can it be all
right to do this to a Christian?
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(c)</span> Things that are in
their own nature indifferent can’t by any human authority be made
any part of the worship of God. Why not? Precisely because they are
indifferent! Indifferent things don’t have in themselves any power
to propitiate the Deity, so no human power or authority can give
them enough dignity and excellency to be able to do that. In the
common affairs of life the use of indifferent things that God
hasn’t forbidden is free and lawful, and therefore in those things
human authority has a place. But it’s not like that with religion.
Indifferent things are lawful in the worship of God only if God
Himself has instituted them and by some positive command ordered
that they be a part of the worship that he will accept from poor
sinful men. And when God angrily asks us ‘Who required this?’, He
won’t be satisfied with the answer ‘The magistrate commanded it’!
If civil jurisdiction goes that far, what <span class=
"ff2">can’t</span> be lawfully be introduced into religion? What
hodgepodge of ceremonies, what superstitious inventions, might not
be imposed on worshippers against their consciences but on the
magistrate’s authority? For most of these ceremonies and
superstitions would consist in the religious use of things that are
in their own nature indifferent; there’s nothing wrong with them
except that God isn’t their author. The sprinkling of water and the
use of bread and wine are, in their own nature and in everyday
life, entirely indifferent; could they have been introduced into
religion and made a part of divine worship except by divine
institution? If any human authority or civil power could have done
this, couldn’t it also command the eating of fish and drinking of
ale in the holy banquet as a part of divine worship? Why not the
sprinkling of animals’ blood, purifications by water or fire, and
countless other such things? Although these things are indifferent
in common uses, when they are brought into divine worship without
divine authority they are as abominable to God as the sacrifice of
a dog.... So indifferent things are under the power of the civil
magistrate, but that doesn’t allow them to be imposed on religious
assemblies, because in the worship of God they cease to be
indifferent....</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘If no aspect of divine worship is to be
left to human discretion, how is it that churches themselves have
the power to order when and where etc. worship is to be conducted?’
My answer to that involves distinguishing •the parts of worship
from •the circumstances of worship. Something is a part of the
worship if it is believed to be appointed by God and to be pleasing
to Him, which makes it necessary. Circumstances are not in this way
necessary. Of course worship must occur at some time in some place;
but <span class="ff2">which</span> time and place is left open, so
they are indifferent.... ·Note that the part/circumstance
distinction depends on <span class="ff2">what is believed to
be</span> pleasing to God·. For example: among the Jews the time
and place of worship and the clothing of those who officiated in it
were not mere circumstances, but a part of the worship itself; if
any of those were varied in any way, they had—·they thought·—no
chance of its being acceptable to God; whereas to
Christians....these are mere circumstances of worship which each
church can vary as it sees fit. [Locke adds a qualification: the
institution of the sabbath as a day to be set apart for worship is
a part and not a circumstance of Christian worship.]</p>
<div class="ftr">14</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 7: Idolatry</div>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(d)</span> Just as the
magistrate has no power to •impose by his laws the use of any rites
and ceremonies in any church, so also he has no power to •forbid
the use of any rites and ceremonies that are already accepted,
approved, and practised by a church; because doing that would
destroy the church itself as an institution whose sole purpose is
to worship God freely in its own way.</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘So if some congregations chose to
•sacrifice infants, or (as the primitive Christians were falsely
accused) •to engage in promiscuous sexual intercourse, or •to do
any other such dreadful thing, the magistrate would be obliged to
tolerate these actions because they are committed in a religious
assembly?’ I answer: those things are not lawful in everyday life
or in private homes, so they aren’t lawful in the worship of God
either. But if people who had gathered for religious purposes
wanted to sacrifice a calf, I deny that that should be prohibited
by a law. The calf’s owner can lawfully kill his calf at home and
burn any part of it he likes; for this does no harm to anyone; and
for the same reason he may kill his calf also in a religious
meeting. Whether doing this <span class="ff2">is</span> pleasing to
God is for the calf-killers to think about. The magistrate’s only
role is to ensure that the commonwealth isn’t harmed and that no
individual suffers personal or financial harm. If the interests of
the commonwealth required all slaughter of beasts to be suspended
for a while, so as to rebuild stocks that had been destroyed by
some extraordinary epidemic, it’s obvious that in that case the
magistrate can forbid all his subjects to kill any calves for any
purpose. But that law would be made about a political matter, not a
religious one; what it prohibits is not •sacrificing calves but
•killing them.</p>
<p class="in">This shows us how a church differs from the
commonwealth. Something that is lawful in the commonwealth can’t be
prohibited by the magistrate in the church.... If any man can
lawfully take bread or wine....in his own house, the law oughtn’t
to deprive him of that same liberty in his religious worship;
though in the church the use of bread and wine is very different
because there it is applied to the mysteries of faith and rites of
Divine worship. But things that are forbidden by law because in
their ordinary use they are harmful to the public ought not to be
permitted to churches in their sacred rites. But the magistrate
should be very careful not to misuse his authority by oppressing
some church, on the pretext of securing the public good.</p>
<h2 id="t7">7: Idolatry</h2><p class="noin">You say: ‘What if a church
is idolatrous—is that also to be tolerated by the magistrate?’ I
answer: What power could the magistrate have to suppress an
•idolatrous church that couldn’t somewhere somewhen be used to ruin
an •orthodox one? Don’t forget that the civil power is the same
everywhere, and that the religion of every monarch is orthodox
<span class="ff2">to him</span>. If the civil magistrate in Geneva,
for instance, is given a power that would enable him to wipe out by
violence and</p>
<div class="ftr">15</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 7: Idolatry</div>
<p class="noin">blood the religion <span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">he means
the Roman Catholic church</span>]</span> that is there wrongly
regarded as idolatrous, by the same rule another magistrate, in
some neighbouring country, may oppress the orthodox religion
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">he means the Reformed
Church</span></span> <span class="fs4">centred in
Geneva<span class="fs3">]</span></span>, and in India the
magistrate may oppress the Christian religion. Either the civil
power can change •everything in religion, according to the
monarch’s pleasure, or it can change •nothing. If it is once
allowed to use laws and penalties to introduce •something into
religion, there will be no way of setting limits ·to such
interference·: it will be lawful to alter anything according to the
rule of truth—i.e. what the magistrate fancies to be the truth. So
no man is to be deprived, on account of his religion, of anything
that he values. Not even ·native· Americans, who are subjects of a
Christian monarch, are to be punished in any way for not accepting
our faith and worship. If they think that by observing the rites of
their own country they are pleasing God and securing happiness, we
should leave this to God and to them.</p>
<p class="in">I’ll tell you how this situation came about, starting
at the beginning. A small weak group of Christians with no
possessions arrive in a pagan country; they beg the
inhabitants—appealing to their common humanity—to help them with
the necessities of life; those necessities are supplied,
habitations are granted, and Christians and pagans come together as
one body of people. The Christian religion takes root in that
country, and spreads, but isn’t yet stronger ·than the pagan
religion·. At that time peace, friendship, faith, and equal justice
are preserved amongst them. After a while the Christian party does
become more powerful ·than the other·, because the magistrate
becomes a Christian. Then immediately all compacts are to be broken
and all civil rights violated, so that idolatry may be wiped out;
and unless these innocent pagans—
<p class="bqb">•strict observers of the rules of
equity and the law of nature, who</p>
<p class="bqb">•in no way offend against the
laws of the society—</p>
give up their ancient religion and accept a new
and strange one, they are to be turned out of the lands and
possessions of their forefathers and perhaps deprived of life
itself. And so we see •what can be done by zeal for the church
combined with the desire for control, and •how easily greed, theft
and ambition are cloaked in the pretext of religion and of the care
of souls.</p>
<p class="in">If you think that idolatry should be rooted out by
laws, punishments, fire, and sword, the above story applies to you,
with only the names changed. Neither pagans in America or
dissenting Christians here in Europe can rightly be deprived of
their worldly goods on religious grounds.</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘But idolatry shouldn’t be tolerated,
because it is a sin.’ If you said ‘Idolatry should be avoided,
because it is a sin’, that would be right. But its being a sin
doesn’t imply that it should be punished by the magistrate. It’s
not for the magistrate to wield his sword in punishing everything
that he thinks is a sin against God. Covetousness,
uncharitableness, idleness, and many other things are generally
agreed to be sins, but no-one has ever said that they should be
punished by the magistrate. That is because they don’t interfere
with other people’s rights, and don’t disturb the public peace.
Even the sins of lying and perjury are nowhere punishable by laws,
except in special cases; and even in those the operative feature is
not •the behaviour’s real wickedness or its offence against God but
rather •the injury done to the offender’s neighbours and to the
commonwealth. And what if in another country a Moslem or a pagan
monarch sees the Christian religion as false and offensive to God;
is it all right for him to wipe out the Christians for that reason
and in that way?</p>
<div class="ftr">16</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 8: Church and state:
articles of faith</div>
<p class="in">You say: ‘By the law of Moses, idolaters were to be
rooted out.’ True; but the law of Moses is not obligatory to us
Christians. Nobody claims that everything generally enjoined by the
law of Moses ought to be practised by Christians.... A promulgated
law is binding only on those to whom it is given. ‘Hear, O Israel’
sufficiently limits the obligations of the law of Moses to that
people. This is answer enough to those who urge the authority of
the law of Moses for inflicting capital punishment on idolaters.
But I will go into this matter in a bit more detail.</p>
<p class="in">[Locke completes this chapter with a couple of pages
of biblical scholarship, making two points. <span class=
"ff3 fs3">(a)</span> The Jewish commonwealth to which the laws of
Moses were issued was an absolute theocracy, in which the
magistrate—the chief legislator—was God. So there was there no
distinction between religious law and civil law; there could be
capital punishment for religious offences because the latter were
also civil offences. This doesn’t hold for any Christian
commonwealth. <span class="ff3 fs3">(b)</span> The Mosaic law
against idolatry was aimed only at Israelites, Locke says: ‘In the
very place where it is ordered that <span class="ff2">an Israelite
idolater should be put to death</span> it is provided that
<span class="ff2">foreigners should not be oppressed</span>
(<span class="ff2">Exodus</span> 22:20,21).’ He goes through some
further historical ins and outs, which don’t contribute to the
general discussion of toleration. Then:]</p>
<p class="in">So much for <span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> outward
worship. Let us now turn to <span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span>
<span class="fs2">faith. <span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">See
the numbering of items on page 13.</span>]</span></span></p>
<h2 id="t8">8: Church and state: articles of
faith</h2>
<p class="noin"><span class="fs3">[</span><span class="fs4">The
next paragraph speaks of ‘practical’ and ‘speculative’
doctrines.</span> <span class="fs4">Here ‘practical’ = ‘having to
do with morality’, and ‘speculative’ = ‘having</span> <span class=
"fs4">to do with non-moral matters of fact’. We can’t say
‘speculative’ = ‘factual’</span> <span class="fs4">because, as
you’ll see in a moment, Locke holds that there are moral</span>
<span class="ha y15b ff1 fs4">facts, i.e. that practical
propositions are <span class="ff2">true</span>. In <span class=
"ff3">(4)</span> on page 21 Locke</span> <span class="fs4">smudges
the speculative/practical line by implying that ‘There is no
God’</span> <span class="fs4">is a practical
proposition.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> Some religious doctrines are practical and some
speculative. Both consist in the knowledge of truth, but ·they
differ in how they relate to the human condition·: speculative
propositions terminate simply in the understanding, while practical
ones relate to the will and to conduct.</p>
<p class="noin">·SPECULATIVE ARTICLES OF FAITH·<br />So speculative opinions—so-called
articles of faith—can’t be imposed on any church by the law of the
land. Why not? Because •they are matters of <span class=
"ff2">belief</span>; •what we believe doesn’t depend on our will;
and •a law requiring people to do something they can’t do would be
absurd. But I’ve said enough about this already. ‘Well, let men at
least <span class="ff2">say</span> that they believe’—i.e. save
their souls by lying to men and to God. What a lovely religion that
is! The only reason the magistrate could have for imposing such a
law is that he thinks this is a way to save men’s souls; but if
<span class="ff2">that</span> is what he thinks, he shows how
little he understands the road to salvation.</p>
<div class="ftr">17</div>
<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 8: Church and state:
articles of faith</div>
<p class="in">Another reason why the magistrate oughtn’t to forbid
the professing or teaching of any speculative opinions in any
church is that such opinions haven’t the slightest relevance to the
civil rights of the subjects. If a Roman Catholic believes that
something that another man calls bread is really the body of
Christ, this isn’t harming the other man. If a Jew believes that
the New Testament is not the word of God, this belief has no effect
on anyone’s civil rights. If a pagan has that belief about both
Testaments, that shouldn’t expose him to punishment as a pernicious
citizen, because it makes no difference to the magistrate’s power
or the people’s welfare. I readily grant that these opinions are
false and absurd; but the ·civil· law is concerned not with •the
truth of opinions but with •the safety and security of the
commonwealth and with each individual’s goods and person. And
there’s nothing wrong with that. The truth will do well enough if
it is left to its own devices.... It isn’t taught by laws, and has
no need of force to get an entrance into men’s minds—unlike errors,
which profit from outside help!.... So much for •speculative
opinions; now let us turn to •practical ones.</p>
<p class="noin">·PRACTICAL ARTICLES OF FAITH·<br />
·Whereas speculative religious
opinions have nothing to do with the civil law, the same is not
true of speculative religious opinions·. <span class="ff2">Living
well</span>—by which I mean living in a way that is morally good—is
a considerable part of religion and true piety and is also the
business of the civil government; it is crucial to the safety of
men’s souls and of the commonwealth. So moral actions belong to the
jurisdiction of both
<p class="bqb">•the outward and inward courts;</p>
<p class="bqb">•the civil and domestic governors;</p>
<p class="bqb">•the magistrate and the conscience.</p>
So we have
to be on guard lest one of these jurisdictions infringes on the
other, creating discord between the keeper of the public peace and
the overseer of the soul. But there won’t be any difficulty about
this if we remember what I have said about the limits of these two
governments.</p>
<p class="in">Every man has an immortal soul that is capable of
eternal happiness or misery. Its happiness depends on his believing
and doing the things that he needs to believe and do if he is to
obtain God’s favour—the things that are prescribed by God for that
purpose. Two things follow from this. <span class=
"ff3 fs3">(1)</span> Having these beliefs and performing these
actions are mankind’s chief obligations, and we should work as hard
and carefully as we can to find out what they are and to perform
them, because nothing in this world outweighs ·what is at stake
in· eternity—there’s just no comparison.
<span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> Because one man doesn’t violate
the rights of another by his false beliefs and improper manner of
worship, and one man’s perdition does no harm to another man’s
affairs, the care of each man’s salvation belongs only to himself.
I don’t mean this to condemn all charitable warnings and attempts
to steer men away from error, which are indeed a Christian’s
greatest duty. Anyone may try to promote another man’s salvation by
using as many urgings and arguments as he pleases, but not by any
use of force and compulsion, any attempt to dominate. In these
matters, no-one is obliged obey someone else’s warnings or advice
further than he himself is convinced....</p>
<p class="in">But besides his immortal soul, a man also has his
temporal life here on earth; this is fragile and of uncertain
duration, and therefore he needs support for it that he can’t get
and keep without working hard: the things we need if we are to live
well and cheerfully are not spontaneously produced by nature, so
that’s something else we have to work at ·in addition to the
things that bear on the salvation of our souls·. But men are so
dishonest that most of them would rather steal the products of
other men’s labours than take the trouble to provide for
themselves; so there is a need for some way of •letting men keep
what they have</p>
<div class="ftr">18</div>

<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 9: Individual
conscience</div>
acquired through honest work, and also of •preserving their liberty
and strength so that they can continue such work; and this has
required men to enter into society with one another so that by
mutual assistance and joint force they may make each of them secure
in his possession of the things that contribute to comfort and
happiness in this life—<span class="ff2">while leaving to each man
the care of his own eternal</span> <span class=
"ff2">happiness</span>. [Locke adds that civil societies are formed
also for defence against attacks from outside, and explains that
all of this works only if there is ‘the magistrate’ who has power
to punish. This account of society, he says, explains how
magistracy began, what it is used for, and what its limits are; he
repeats that in all of this there is nothing about beliefs or
actions that are needed for the salvation of souls; and he sums
up:]
<p class="in">With regard to eternal salvation, everyone should do
what he in his conscience thinks is acceptable to the Almighty, on
whose good pleasure and acceptance depends his eternal happiness.
Obedience is due <span class="ff2">first</span> to God and
<span class="ff2">then</span> to the laws ·of the land·.</p>
<h2 id="t9">9: Individual conscience</h2><p class="noin">But you say:
‘What if the magistrate officially commands something that seems to
the conscience of some private person to be wrong?’ I answer: if
government is faithfully administered and the magistrate really is
concerned for the public good, this won’t often happen. But if it
ever <span class="ff2">does</span> happen, I say, that such a
private person should refuse to perform the action that his
conscience condemns, and should submit to the punishment for this
if it isn’t morally wrong for him to undergo it. When a law
intended for the public good is privately judged by someone to be
wicked, that doesn’t invalidate the law or create an excuse. But if
the law really does concern things that lie outside the
magistrate’s authority (e.g. commanding people to accept a strange
religion....), then men are not obliged to obey that law against
their consciences. Political society is instituted purely to secure
each man’s possession of the things of this life. Each man’s soul
and other heavenly matters don’t belong to the commonwealth and
can’t be subjected to it; they are left entirely to the man
himself....</p>
<p class="in">But you say: ‘What if the magistrate believes that
some law about those matters is for the public good?’ I answer:
Just as the private erroneous judgment of any particular person
doesn’t exempt him obeying the law, so also the private judgment
(for that’s what it is) of the magistrate doesn’t give him any new
right of imposing laws on his subjects—a right that wasn’t
conferred on him in the constitution of the government, and wasn’t
ever in the power of the people to grant—and this holds with extra
strength if the magistrate is trying to enrich and advance his
followers and co-religionists with goods stolen from others.
Another question: ‘What if the magistrate believes that he has a
right to make such laws and that they are for the public good,
and</p>
<div class="ftr">19</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 10. What should not be
tolerated</div>
<p class="noin">his subjects believe the contrary? Who shall judge between them?’ I
answer: ‘God alone—there’s no earthly judge to decide between the
supreme ·earthly· magistrate and the people. On the last day—·the
Day of Judgment·—God will treat everyone according to his deserts,
i.e. according to his sincerity and uprightness in trying to
promote piety, and the public welfare and peace of mankind’. You
say: ‘What’s to be done in the meantime?’ I answer: ‘Each person’s
chief concern should be for his own soul, and after that for public
peace; though there aren’t many people who, viewing the wilderness
of the contemporary world, will think they are looking at peace.
<span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">Locke is here echoing a famous
line by the historian</span></span> <span class="fs4">Tacitus, who
imagines a British warrior saying about the Romans <span class=
"ff2">Ubi</span></span> <span class="ff2 fs4">solitudinem faciunt,
pacem apellant—where they create a wilderness they</span>
<span class="fs4">call it ‘peace’.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="in">There are two sorts of contests amongst men, one
managed by law and the other by force; and their nature is such
that whenever law stops, force begins. But the magistrate’s power
in the various different kinds of nations is not part of my present
concern. I only know what <span class="ff2">usually</span> happens
when controversies arise without a judge to settle them. You say:
‘So the magistrate, being the stronger, will prevail.’ No doubt you
right; but our present question concerns what ought to happen, not
what probably will happen.</p><h2 id="t10">10. What should
not be tolerated</h2><p class="noin">To get down to details now, I have four
main things to say.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> The magistrate
should not tolerate any doctrines that are contrary to human
society or to the moral rules that are needed for civil society to
survive. But there are very few such doctrines in any church;
because it would be hard for a sect to become so lunatic as to
teach, as a matter of religious doctrine, things that clearly
undermine the foundations of society and are therefore condemned by
the judgment of all mankind; because that would endanger their own
interests, their peace, their reputation, everything.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> An evil that is less
visible but more dangerous to the commonwealth occurs when men
claim for themselves and their co-religionists some special
prerogative that does in fact conflict with the civil right of the
community but is covered over with a glittery show of deceitful
words. For example: no sect teaches explicitly and openly
<p class="bq"><span class="ff3 fs3">(a)</span> that men aren’t obliged to keep their
promises;</p>
<p class="bq"><span class="ff3 fs3">(b)</span> that monarchs may be dethroned
by those who differ from them in religion; or</p>
<p class="bq"><span class="ff3 fs3">(c)</span> that they alone have dominion of all
things.</p>
For if these were proposed thus nakedly and plainly,
they would soon attract the attention of the magistrate and arouse
the commonwealth to be on its guard against the spreading of such a
dangerous evil. Yet these things <span class="ff2">are</span> said,
though in other words. <span class="ff3 fs3">(a)</span> Those who
teach that promises to heretics needn’t be kept mean that the
privilege of breaking promises belongs only to themselves, because
they do—or easily could when they found it convenient—declare
that</p>
<div class="ftr">20</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 10. What should not be
tolerated</div>
everyone who doesn’t belong to their sect is a heretic.
<span class="ff3 fs3">(b)</span> What can they mean when they say
that kings who are excommunicated forfeit their crowns and
kingdoms? They are obviously claiming for themselves the power to
depose kings, because they claim that their hierarchy has the sole
right to excommunicate anyone. <span class="ff3 fs3">(c)</span>
Those who maintain that <span class="ff2">dominion is founded in
grace</span> are in effect claiming the possession of all things;
for they....believe themselves to be the truly pious and faithful.
People like these—
<p class="bq">who attribute to those who are faithful, religious, and
orthodox—i.e. to <span class="ff2">themselves</span>—any special privilege or
power in civil matters; or who on pretence of religion claim any sort of authority over people who
aren’t members of their ecclesiastical
communion</p>—have no right to be tolerated by the magistrate.
Nor do those who refuse to accept and teach the duty of tolerating
all men in matters of religion. What doctrines like these signify
is that these people are ready on any occasion to seize the
government and take possession of the estates and fortunes of their
fellow subjects, and that all they want from the magistrate is to
be tolerated until they have enough power to carry this out.
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(3)</span> A church can’t have
any right to be tolerated by the magistrate if it is constituted on
a basis such that anyone who joins it is thereby giving himself
over to the protection and service of a different monarch. For this
would establish a foreign jurisdiction in his own country; the
magistrate would be allowing enemy soldiers to be enlisted from
among his own people.</p>
<p class="noin"><span class="fs3">[</span><span class="fs4">If you
aren’t to be needlessly puzzled by what comes next, you need
to</span> <span class="fs4">know that Locke is thinking of a
situation in which the magistrate <span class=
"ff2">allows</span></span> <span class="fs4">a church whose members
owe allegiance to a foreign power because he</span> <span class=
"fs4">himself <span class="ff2">belongs</span> to such a church.
This was written in 1685, when the</span> <span class="fs4">Roman
Catholic James II was on the English throne, and there were
fears</span> <span class="fs4">that he might bring into England
some of France’s notably brutal ways of</span> <span class=
"fs4">suppressing Protestants. This text was first published in
1689, the year</span> <span class="fs4">after James II was
bloodlessly driven into exile.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="noin">The
frivolous and fallacious distinction between the Court and the
church is no help here <span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">He must
mean that that distinction</span></span> <span class=
"ff2 fs4">would be <span class="ff1">frivolous if...
etc.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></span>, especially when both
Court and church are equally subject to the absolute authority of
the same person, who not only has power to <span class=
"ff2">persuade</span> the members of his church to do whatever he
likes—either as purely religious, or as contributing to the good of
religion—but can also <span class="ff2">order</span> them to do it
on pain of eternal fire. It would be absurd for anyone to claim to
be a Moslem only in his religion and in everything else a faithful
subject of a Christian magistrate, if he admits that he is bound to
give blind obedience to the Mufti of Constantinople, who himself
•is entirely obedient to the Ottoman Emperor and •invents the
‘oracles’ of that religion to suit himself. And this Moslem living
among Christians would renounce their government even more openly
if he acknowledged the supreme magistrate in the state to be also
the head of his church.</p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(4)</span> No-one should be
tolerated who denies the existence of God. Promises, covenants, and
oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold on an
atheist: this all dissolves in the presence of the thought that
there is no God. And atheists can’t claim <span class="ff2">on
religious grounds</span> that they should be tolerated! As for
other practical opinions, including ones that have some error in
them, there’s no reason why they shouldn’t be tolerated as long as
they don’t tend to establish domination over others or claim civil
impunity for the church in which they are taught,</p>
<div class="ftr">21</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 11: Gatherings</div>
<h2 id="t11">11: Gatherings</h2><p class="noin">It remains for me to
say something about the <span class="ff2">assemblies</span> that
are thought to present a challenge to this doctrine of toleration
because they commonly are thought to be hotbeds of sedition and
dissent. Perhaps some of them have been—not because of anything
special about assemblies as such but rather because of special
features of those assemblies in particular, e.g. troubles relating
to oppression and lack of freedom. These accusations would stop if
the law of toleration were so settled that all churches had to
•declare toleration as the basis for their own liberty, and •teach
that....nobody ought to be compelled in matters of religion either
by law or force. Establishing this one thing would take away the
basis for all the anger and disturbances on grounds of conscience,
leaving these assemblies as calm and peaceful as any other
gatherings. But let us look in more detail into the accusations
against assemblies.</p>
<p class="noin">You say: ‘Assemblies and meetings endanger the
public peace and threaten the commonwealth.’ I answer: If that is
right, then why are there so many meetings every day in markets and
law-courts and town squares?</p>
<p class="noin">You say: ‘Those are <span class=
"ff2">civil</span> assemblies. What I am objecting to are
ecclesiastical ones.’ I answer: You seem to think that assemblies
that are altogether remote from civil affairs are the ones that are
most apt to make trouble for them!</p>
<p class="noin">You say: ‘The members of civil
assemblies differ from one another in matters of religion, whereas
these ecclesiastical meetings are groups of people who all have the
same ·religious· opinion.’ I reply: Do you really think that
agreement in matters of religion amounts to a conspiracy against
the commonwealth? or that denying men the freedom to assemble would
make them <span class="ff2">less</span> likely to agree in
religious matters?</p>
<p class="noin">You say: ‘Civil assemblies are open and free for
anyone to enter into, whereas religious gatherings provide a better
setting for the hatching of secret plots.’ I reply: On the
contrary, many civil assemblies are not <span class=
"ff2">open</span> to everyone, e.g. meetings of guilds and the
like. And if some religious meetings are private, whose fault is
that? those who want them to be public or those who forbid it?</p>
<p class="noin">You
say: ‘Religious togetherness brings men’s minds extremely close
together, which is a reason to fear them.’ I reply: Then why isn’t
the magistrate afraid of his own church? why doesn’t he forbid
their assemblies as things dangerous to his government?</p>
<p class="noin">You say:
‘Because he himself is a part of them, the head of them.’ I reply:
You seem to forget that he is also a part of the commonwealth, and
the head of the whole people!</p>
<p class="in">This is how things stand. The magistrate is afraid of
other churches, but not of his own, because he is kind and
favourable to his church but severe and harsh toward the others. He
is indulgent towards his coreligionists, allowing them almost any
liberty; members of other churches he uses as slaves and, however
blamelessly they live, he rewards them with galleys, prisons,
confiscations, and death. He cherishes and defends the members of
his own church and continually scourges and oppresses the members
of the others. Let the tables be turned; or let those dissenters
merely enjoy the same privileges in civil affairs as his other
subjects, ·his coreligionists·, and he will quickly find that these
religious meetings need not be feared: if men enter into</p>
<div class="ftr">22</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 11: Gatherings</div>
seditious conspiracies, they are led to it not by religion in their
meetings but their sufferings and oppression. Just and moderate
governments are everywhere quiet, everywhere safe; injustice and
tyranny are always resisted. I know that seditions are often raised
on religious pretexts; but it’s also true that often people are
ill-treated and made to live miserably on religious pretexts.
Believe me, the troubles that arise don’t come from •any special
features of this or that church or religious society, but from
•something that all mankind have in common. namely that when they
are groaning under a heavy burden they try to get out from under
the yoke that hurts their necks.
<p class="in">Try this thought-experiment. Suppose that religion is
set aside and that men are classified on the basis of physical
features, and that those who have (say) black hair or grey eyes
don’t enjoy the same privileges as other citizens; that
<p class="bqb">•they aren’t allowed to buy or sell, or live
by their trades;</p>
<p class="bqb">•as parents they don’t have control of their
children’s education;</p>
<p class="bqb">•they are all either excluded from the benefit
of the laws, or meet with biased judges;</p>
do you doubt that these people—marked off from others by the colour
of their hair and eyes, and drawn together by one common
persecution—would be as dangerous to the magistrate as any others
who had come together on religious grounds? People come together
for trade and profit, for idly drinking together, for being with
neighbours, for being with coreligionists; but there’s only one
thing that brings people together to plan sedition, and that is
oppression.</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘Are you really willing to have people meet
for divine service against the magistrate’s will?’ I answer: Why
‘against his will’? Their coming together is lawful and necessary.
‘Against his will’, you say: that’s what I am complaining about; it
is the root of all the mischief. Why are assemblies in a church
more frowned on that ones is a theatre or a market? Those who meet
in a church are not more wicked or more trouble-making than those
who meet elsewhere.... Take away the legal discrimination against
them, by changing the laws take away the penalties they are
subjected to, and everything will become safe and peaceable.... And
all the various dissident churches, as guardians of the public
peace, will watch one another so that nothing may be changed in the
form of the government, because they can hope for nothing better
than what they already enjoy—that is, equality with their
fellow-subjects under a just and moderate government. <span class=
"fs3">[<span class="fs4">‘magistrate’—‘monarch’—see note on page
3.</span>]</span> Now if the church to which the monarch belongs is
regarded as the chief support of any civil government simply
because the monarch is kind and the laws are favourable to it, the
government will be even more secure when all good subjects,
whatever church they belong to, enjoy the same favour of the
monarch and the same benefit of the laws, because they will all
become the common support and guard of it....</p>
<div class="ctr"> * * * * * </div>
<p class="noin">To sum up
the position I have been urging: let every man enjoy the same
rights as every other. Is it permitted to worship God in the Roman
manner? Then let it be permitted to worship in the Geneva form
also. Is it permitted to speak Latin in the market-place? Then let
those who want to speak it also in the church. Is it lawful for any
man in his own house to kneel, stand, sit, or take any other
position? to clothe himself in white or black, in short or in long
garments? Let it be lawful to eat bread, drink wine, or wash with
water in the church. Anything that is left free by law in everyday
life situations, let it be free also in divine worship in a
church.</p>
<div class="ftr">23</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 11: Gatherings</div>
Let no man’s life, or body, or house, or estate, suffer any kind of
harm on these accounts....
<p class="in">If anything happens in a religious meeting that is
seditious and contrary to the public peace, it should be punished
in exactly the same way as if it had happened in a public square.
These meetings ought not to be sanctuaries for trouble-makers and
rogues.... No-one at such a meeting ought to be blamed for the
presence there of a law-breaker. Everyone should be accountable for
his own actions, and no man is to be laid under a suspicion or
odium for the fault of another: those who are seditious, murderers,
thieves, robbers, adulterers, slanderers etc. ought to be punished
and suppressed, whatever church they belong to—even if it’s the
magistrate’s church. But those whose doctrine is peaceable and
whose manners are pure and blameless ought to be on equal terms
with their fellow-subjects.</p>
<p class="in">If people of one religious persuasion are allowed to
come together for religious ceremonies, celebrations of feast days,
listening to speeches and public worship, the same permission
should also be given to Arminians, Calvinists, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, and Socinians. Let me tell you the truth about this,
openly, man to man: <span class="ff3">neither pagan nor</span>
<span class="ff3">Moslem nor Jew should be shut out from the
republic</span> <span class="ff3">because of his religion</span>.
•The gospel commands no such thing. •It isn’t wanted by the Church,
which ‘judgeth not those who are without’ (1 <span class=
"ff2">Corinthians</span> 5:12). And •it isn’t demanded by the
commonwealth, which takes in everyone who is honest, peaceable, and
hard-working. Shall we allow a pagan to deal and trade with us yet
not allow him to worship God? If we allow Jews to have private
houses amongst us, why shouldn’t we permit them to have synagogues?
Is their doctrine more false, their worship more abominable, or
civil peace more endangered by their meeting in public than in
their private houses? But if these things can be granted to Jews
and pagans, should any Christians be worse off than they are in a
Christian commonwealth?</p>
<p class="in">You say: ‘Yes, they should be, because they are more
given to factions, tumults, and civil wars.’ I answer: Is this the
fault of the Christian religion? If it is, then the Christian
religion is the worst of all religions and oughtn’t to be
•professed by you or •tolerated by any commonwealth.... But this
<span class="ff2">isn’t</span> what Christianity is like; it is
indeed more strongly opposed to covetousness, ambition, discord,
property-disputes etc. than any other religion that has ever
existed—<span class="ff2">and</span> it is the most modest and
peaceable. So we must look elsewhere for the cause of the evils
that are blamed on religion; and if we think straight about the
matter we’ll find that the entire cause has to do with my present
topic, ·toleration·. What has produced all the religious quarrels
and wars that have occurred in the Christian world is not •the
(inevitable) diversity of opinions but rather •the (avoidable)
denial of toleration to those who are of different opinions. The
•heads of the church, driven by greed and an insatiable hunger for
control, have exploited the magistrates’ ambition (often out of
control) and the (always stupid) superstition of the multitude,
arousing the populace against those who dissent from •themselves,
by preaching to them, contrary to the laws of the Gospel and to the
precepts of charity, that schismatics and heretics should be
deprived of their possessions and wiped out. In this they have
mixed together two things that are really utterly different, the
church and the commonwealth.</p>
<p class="in">When men are stripped of the goods they have acquired
by honest work, industry, and, contrary to all the laws of equity,
human and divine, are exposed to other men’s violence and robbery,
it is very difficult for them to put up with this patiently.
Especially when they are otherwise entirely blameless, and the
‘reason’ for this treatment lies</p>
<div class="ftr">24</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 11: Gatherings</div>
right outside the magistrate’s jurisdiction and is a matter for the
individual’s conscience and the salvation of his soul, for which he
is accountable only to God.
<p class="in">When these men, growing weary of the evils under
which they labour, eventually come to think it lawful for them to
resist force with force, and to defend their natural rights (which
are not forfeitable on account of religion) with arms as well as
they can, what else could we expect? To learn that this has in the
past been the ordinary course of things, study history; to know
that it will continue in the future, think! It is bound to be like
that as long as the principle of religious persecution goes on
prevailing with the magistrate and the people, and as long as those
who ought to preach peace and harmony go on deploying all their
skill and strength to arouse men to arms and sound the trumpet of
war. It would be astonishing that magistrates should allow these
incendiaries and disturbers of the public peace if we couldn’t see
that they have been invited by them to a share of the spoils, and
have been led to make use of their covetousness and pride as means
to increasing their own power. <span class="fs3">[<span class=
"fs4">In that</span></span> <span class="fs4">difficult sentence,
Locke evidently means that the magistrate allows the</span>
<span class="fs4">disturber to make trouble because the magistrate
has been invited by</span> <span class="fs4">the disturber to share
in the spoils of the trouble; so that the disturber</span>
<span class="fs4">is using the magistrate’s greed and pride as a
means to the disturber’s</span> <span class="fs4">increasing his
own power. Clearly the disturbers of the peace in question</span>
<span class="fs4">are not</span> •<span class="fs4">the restless
and rebellious oppressed people with which this</span> <span class=
"fs4">paragraph began, but</span> •<span class="fs4">their
oppressors—the leaders of the favoured</span> <span class=
"fs4">church who disturb the peace by preaching intolerance against
other</span> <span class="fs4">churches.<span class=
"fs3">]</span></span> For who does not see that these <span class=
"ff2">good men</span>—·these disturbers of the peace·—are ministers
not so much of the gospel as of the government, and that by
flattering the ambition and supporting the dominion of monarchs and
men in authority they are doing their best to promote in the
commonwealth the tyranny that they couldn’t in any other way have
established in the church? That’s how church and state come to work
together. If each of them would stay within its own bounds—one
attending to the worldly welfare of the commonwealth, the other to
the salvation of souls—there couldn’t possibly be any discord
between them....</p>
<p class="in">I beg God Almighty to bring it about <span class=
"ff3 fs3">(1)</span> that the gospel of peace comes to be preached;
<span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> that civil magistrates—trying
harder to make their own consciences fit God’s law, and less hard
to bind other men’s consciences by human laws—direct all their
counsels and endeavours in a fatherly way to promote the worldly
good of all their children, except ones who are arrogant,
ungovernable, and injurious to their brethren; and <span class=
"ff3 fs3">(3)</span> that all ecclesiastics who pronounce
themselves to be the successors of the Apostles—walking peacefully
and modestly in the Apostles’ steps, and not getting mixed in with
state affairs—apply themselves wholly to promoting the salvation of
souls.</p>
<div class="ftr">25</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 12. Heresy and schism</div>
<h2 id="t12">12: Heresy and schism</h2><p class="noin">It may be
worthwhile to say a little about heresy and schism. A Moslem isn’t
and can’t be either a heretic or a schismatic to a Christian; and
if anyone leaves the Christian faith and joins Islam, that doesn’t
make him a heretic or a schismatic—it makes him an apostate and an
infidel. This is entirely uncontroversial; and it shows that men of
different religions <span class="fs2">can’t be heretics or
schismatics ·relative· to one another.</span></p>
<p class="in">What we have to look into, then, is ·how the concepts
of heresy and schism work in relation to· men who are of the same
religion. It’s clear those who have the very same rule of faith and
worship have the same religion, and those whose faith and worship
are different belong to different religions. That is because
everything that belongs to that religion is contained in that rule,
so that those who have the same rule belong to one and the same
religion, and those who haven’t don’t. Thus Moslems and Christians
are of different religions because Christians take the Holy
Scriptures as the rule of their religion, and Moslems take the
Koran. And by that criterion there can be different religions
amongst Christians. Papists and Lutherans, though both profess
faith in Christ and are therefore called ‘Christians’ are not of
the same religion, because Lutherans acknowledge only the Holy
Scriptures as the rule and foundation of their religion, while
Papists have as their rule not only the Holy Scriptures but also
traditions and the decrees of Popes....</p>
<p class="noin"> ·WHAT HERESY IS·<br />
From this it follows •that heresy is a
split in ecclesiastical communion between men who have the same
religion but differ on some doctrine that isn’t contained in the
rule ·that defines the religion·; and •that among those who
recognize only the Holy Scriptures as their rule of faith, heresy
is a split in their Christian communion concerning doctrines that
aren’t explicitly contained in Scripture. This split ·among
<span class="fs2">Christians<span class="fs1">·</span> can happen
in either of two ways.</span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> It happens when the
greater part of the church—or the stronger part (thanks to the
magistrate’s patronage)—separates itself from the rest, excluding
them from the church’s communion because they refuse to declare
their belief in certain opinions that aren’t explicitly stated in
Scripture. What makes a group heretical is not the smallness of
their numbers or the authority of the magistrate; someone is a
heretic if (and only if) is it he who on the basis of such opinions
divides the church into parts, introduces names and marks of
distinction, deliberately creates a split because of those
opinions. <span class="fs3">[<span class="fs4">Locke is saying,
then, that in the situation</span></span> <span class=
"fs4">described at the start of this paragraph it is the bigger or
stronger faction</span> <span class="fs4">that is heretical, not
the remainder.<span class="fs3">]</span></span></p>
<p class="in"><span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> Heresy occurs when
someone separates himself from the communion of a church because
the church doesn’t publicly profess certain opinions that the Holy
Scriptures don’t clearly teach.</p>
<p class="in">Both these—·the group and the individual·—are
heretics because they are wrong about fundamentals, and obstinately
go against prudence and knowledge. When they specified that the
Holy Scriptures were to be the only foundation of faith, they also
gave a fundamental status to certain propositions that are not in
Scripture, and because others won’t accept these additional
opinions of theirs as necessary and fundamental, they create a
split in the church either <span class="ff3 fs3">(2)</span> by
withdrawing from it or <span class="ff3 fs3">(1)</span> by
expelling others from it. It doesn’t help their position to say
that their favoured opinions <span class="ff2">fit</span> with
Scripture and with the analogy of faith. If they are</p>
<div class="ftr">26</div>


<div class="hdr">Toleration John Locke 12. Heresy and schism</div>
<p class="noin">drawn up in the words of Scripture, there can be no question about
them, because all Christians acknowledge those things as being
divinely inspired and therefore fundamental. But if you (·I’m
speaking to a heretic now·) say ·only· that the <span class=
"fs2">items you want to be professed are <span class=
"ff2">consequences</span> of what is</span> in Scripture, I
say
<p class="bq">believing and professing things that seem to
you agreeable to the rule of faith—well done!</p>
but
<p class="bq">trying to force those things down the throats
of people who don’t see them as indubitable Scriptural
doctrines—not well done!</p>
To create a split because of things like these, which aren’t and
can’t be fundamental, is to be a heretic. I don’t think that any
man is so lunatic as to dare to hawk his consequences and
interpretations of Scripture as ‘divine inspirations’ and to put
•the articles of faith that he has constructed on a par with •the authority of Scripture. I know some
propositions are so evidently agreeable to Scripture that they can’t be denied
to be consequences of it; and there can’t be any difference of
opinion about those. ·And just for that reason, they aren’t
relevant to our present topic of heresy, where by definition there always <span class="ff2">is</span> a
difference of opinion. Returning now to that topic (and
again I am addressing the heretic)·: However clearly it seems to
you that something-or-other follows from Scripture, you shouldn’t
force it on others because <span class="ff2">you</span> believe it
to be agreeable to the rule of faith—or not unless you think it
would be fair enough for other doctrines to be imposed on you in
the same way. That would involve you in having to accept and
profess all the different and contradictory opinions of Lutherans,
Calvinists, Arminians, Anabaptists, and so on—opinions which the
manufacturers of symbols, systems and confessions pass out to their
followers as genuine and necessary deductions from the Holy
Scripture. I’m amazed at the rash arrogance <span class="fs2">of
men who think that <span class="ff2">they</span> can explain things
necessary to</span> salvation more clearly than the Holy Ghost, the
eternal and infinite wisdom of God.</p>
<p class="noin">·WHAT SCHISM IS·<br />
So much for •heresy, a word that in common usage is applied only to
the doctrinal part of religion. Let us now consider •schism. This
is a crime <span class="ff2">like</span> heresy, for both these
words seem to me to signify an ill-grounded split in an
ecclesiastical communion, arising from things that are not
necessary ·to the faith·. But ordinary usage, which determines
what is correct in language, has determined that •heresy relates to
errors in faith and •schism to errors in worship or discipline; so
I am following that distinction.</p>
<p class="in">Schism, then....is a split made in the communion of a
church because of something in divine worship or ecclesiastical
discipline that is not a necessary part of the faith. Nothing in
worship or church discipline can be necessary to Christian
communion apart from what was commanded, in so many words, by
Christ our legislator or by the Apostles ·speaking· under the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit.</p>
<p class="in">What I say is this: Someone who doesn’t deny anything
that the Holy Scriptures teach explicitly, and doesn’t create a
split because of something that isn’t clearly contained in the
sacred text—whatever label any sect of Christians slap on him, and
however many of them say that there’s nothing Christian about
him—cannot be either a heretic or a schismatic.</p>
<div class="ftr">27</div>
</body>
</html>
